# Oh My GDB
# Introduction
Technically speaking, I wasn't really planning on using GDB... ever. In my general STM32 use cases, CubeIDE provided sufficient debugging cases over the ST-Link. However, in a recent incident, everything stopped working, and so I had to resort to.... more annoying means.

# What Happened?
To be honest, I still don't know. One moment I was using my Nucleo ST-Link to flash my F7 board, and the next everything went to shit. I clicked on the debug button to try to step through the code on the F7, and then evertyhing just randomly reset. I'm yet to determine if any permanant damage has occured for either the F7 board or my nucleo board.

But after that, even trying to flash programs to either board stopped working. It kept dying in the middle, with seemingly no explanation.

# The Process
## Trying to Flash via CubeIDe
I started by just trying to flash the device via CubeIDE. This is what I expected to be the most reliable method. However, I had zero luck. The same error of "Debug Disconnection" ketp appearing. Regardless of what I tried; simplifying the code, chanigng the program, removing external libraries, nothing worked. 
No matter what I tried, it refused to cooperate. In fact, even trying to connect or discover the device via CubeProgrammer failed. Although the ST-Link was clearly detected, I always got a "chip not detected" error when trying to actually connect.
This eventually (after two hours) lead me to giving up on ST's standard software... and I went to sleep.

## Moving to OpenOCD
Eight glorious hours of sleep later, I woke up, not feeling very refreshed. The issue was still at the top of my mind. But today, I decided to try out my preferred flashing method - OpenOCD. The reason I didn't start with this was that I believed that ST's proprietary software would have better luck than the open source stuff. But after the hours I spent with no luck, I decided to give up.

I initially tried connecting to the board using the standard:
```bash
openocd -f board/st_nucleo_f103rb
```
command. But this gave me absolutely no results. I kept getting the same issue of either `chip not detected` or `jtag error` or something of the sort. 

Eventually, I decided to change two things:
1. Don't use the board configuration, do ST-Link + F103
2. Add in a "software reset" command to force a connect under reset
Giving me a command that *finally* let me connect to the board:
```bash
openocd -f interface/stlink.cfg -c "adapter speed 5" -c "reset_config srst_only connect_assert_srst" -f target/stm32f1x.cfg 
```
You'll also notice that the "adapter speed" (speed of communication with the chip) is set to "5". This is basically slowing the communication down a lot, just in case the problem is something with regards to that. Running this command, I finally got gdb and openocd terminals open, where I could interact with the chip.

First thing I did was to halt and dump registers. When I got valid replies for both of those, I knew I hadn't irrevocably damaged the chip. From there, I tried loading a blinky sketch, and that's where the problems picked up again.

# Stepping Through Assembly
This is where things got **incredibly** tedious. I was initially really glad that I was able to flash code to the system by loading an elf file via gdb (`arm-none-eabi-gdb blinky.elf` >> `load`), but when I tried to run the program (`monitor reset run`) the program instantly crashed, with barely any information to me. 

Now, a lot of places told me a lot of things. Most noteably AI telling me that I had too many configuration files in my code (no I did not). But I decided to bite the bullet and just start going through the execution of the program, line by assembly line.

I started by setting breakpoints at `main`, `HAL_Init` and the other initialization functions auto-generated by CubeMX. Then, I worked my way through them.

While `HAL_Init` worked fine, `SystemClock_Config()` most certainly did not. To be honest, I didn't know "step" was an option here. I thought I could only set breakpoints. So I was confused for a little bit on how to get more information than "the program breaks at clock configuration".

This was a very weird moment. Especially because I didn't do any clock configuration. I just used ST's preset for my nucleo board. So I had no clue why it was failing.

But, as I stepped through the code, I finally found that the code died immediately after this line:
```C
RCC_OscInitStruct.PLL.PLLMUL = RCC_PLL_MUL16
```
This line essentially sets the internal PLL multiplier to 16, thus setting (in my configuration at least) the internal clock frequency to 64 MHz. Normally, this shouldn't be a problem. 

However, there was another error message that I had neglected until this point. `Target voltage = 1.807652V`. 

Any sane person would have immediately seen this and realized "oh! The board is underpowered". But I simply thought it was a glitch. See, in my experience with the boards, a lot of times it just doesn't properly detect the voltage. So I thought it really didn't matter. Little did I know that I was absolutely wrong. 

The chip's operating voltage is in the 2.3V+ range, which my voltage was sorely out of. Yet it kept limping along. However, the clock speed of 64MHz was too much for its weak constitution. This caused the chip to crash in the middle of the program, making it difficult to recover.

# The Solution?
One change. Swap the PLL multiplier from 16 to 2. Severely drop the internal clock speed. All became well. For such a simple solution, it took awfully long to figure it out. However, I don't think that's the complete answer. I still couldn't *flash* code reliably. Anything more complex than a blinky completely killed the system.

However, I could get the code onto the system (and get it running) by very *very* carefully stepping through the run on the first instance. In another example, I flashed some code to control a little 128x64 OLED screen. While it didn't work immediately, when I put breakpoints at every initi function and then stepped through the OLED init function, it actually managed to work (very surprisingly). 

Overall, this was a great exercise in working with GDB, because I got familiar with it's commands. I also realized that devices can be vastly underpowered, yet still work out. I look forward to screwing around with this more, just to see how much I can do.

Cheers!
